Now let's look at the next control flow statement, which is a switch statement.
A switch statement has a lot of details involved, and we'll try to get a very clear understanding of
it.
And as we go along, we will also look at some code and test most of the stuff we learn.
So let's get started with the switch statement.
A switch statement can be used as an alternative to if statement.
Notice that can hear, which means that we cannot represent all if statements using switch statements.
Only a certain type of statements can be represented using switch statements and we will see what those
are.
Let's consider this if statement where the variable month is initialized to three.
The if statement has a sequence of conditions where each condition simply tests if the month matches
a certain value here since month is three, the third condition will be true and the value match gets
printed.
Now let's see how the same code can be represented using a switch statement.
And here is the switch statement and it is not yet complete.
We will build it gradually by comparing it with the if example we just saw.
So to begin with, the syntax involves the keyword switch followed by parentheses with a switch expression,
and the switch expression is the variable month in our example.
Parenthesis is followed by the opening and closing presses.
Closing press indicates the end of the switch statement and the entire block of code between the two
braces is referred to as a switch block.
Now notice that the switch expression in the parentheses is simply the variable month.
So it is not a condition but simply a variable.
But we know that control flow statements are all about conditions.
So we need to have conditions.
And for that, a switch statement uses something called case statements, which involves the reserved
keyboard case, which is followed by what is called a case label, which is in turn followed by a column.
And after the colon, we may optionally have some statements.
Now, a condition would be the switch expression compared with the case label using an E quality operator.
So in our example, we have three conditions with variable month being matched with the case labels
one, two and three.
Since month is three, it will match the third case label and so the corresponding statements will be
executed.
Not that the switch expression can also be a literal.
So instead of having variable montage speech expression, we can also instead have the literal three.
You can notice the optional brake statement too, and it indicates the end of switch statement itself.
That is a terminates the enclosing switch without a brake statement.
All subsequent case blocks are executed in sequence regardless of their case tables until a brake is
encountered.
Also the break statement has to be the last statement in the case block.
Otherwise, we get a compiler error as any statements following it are unreachable.
No.
Comparing the speech example with our F example, you may wonder what corresponds to the default block
for that which supports a default block, as you can see here.
The default blog simply has the keyword default followed by colon, which is followed by its block of
code like any case block.
So a default block does not have a case label.
Note that we can have at most one default block, but one difference from if statement is that default
block may be followed by case blocks.
That is default block need not be the last block.
However, if you recall in an EF statement, the LS block if present must be the last block of the code.
Since default block need not be the last block, it can also have an optional brake statement.
Now, here is an important thing to note about the type of speech expression.
A speech explosion can be an integer, that it can be a little like seven or it can be an integer variable,
or it can also be an expression involving more than one variable like x plus y.
Only requirement is that the final value the expression evaluates to should be an integer.
Now when we say an integer variable, it can be a variable of type eight or any of the smaller data
types.
Additionally, the variable can also be an instance of these classes.
That is a variable can be an object reference to.
And these classes are called box primitives or wrapper classes as the wrapper primitive value.
For example, here, integer class would wrap a primitive end value.
So at runtime, when the variable is evaluated, the primitive value will be unwrapped and will be compared
with the case labels.
Later, we will look at box parameters and how they are useful.
A switch expression can also be a string, and this works only from Java seven onwards.
That is using string as a switch expression in an earlier version of Java will result in a compiler
error.
Finally, a switch expression can also be an enum and idioms will be discussed much later.
So if a switch expression is something other than these three, then we get a compiler error.
Moreover, if such expression evaluates to null at one time, then we get a null pointer exception.
Since we mentioned that we can have object references as fetch expression, there is a possibility for
ending up with a null reference and getting a null pointer exception.
There are also a few things to note about case labels.
First restriction is that the value of case label must be within the range of the data type of the switch
expression.
In the next slide, we will look at an example of this.
The second restriction is that the value of case label must be known at compile time itself.
We will also look at an example of this.
So let's not worry about it for now.
Third restriction is that the case label value must be unique.
That is, you cannot have duplicate case labels in the same switch statement.
And fourth is that case label cannot be null.
If any of these restrictions are not met, we get a compiler error.
Now let's look at the first restriction with an example.
First restriction is that the case label value must be within the range of the data type of the switch
expression.
In this example, we have declared as a byte.
So we know that the range of byte data type is -128 to 127, and hence the case labels should also be
within this range.
Since the second case level is 128, which is outside the range of byte, we get a compiler error.
Let's now actually start our demo and look at this particular restriction to.
Look at this time.
Let me show the demo in my eclipse ide and this is to just save some time development.
Using Eclipse ID is very fast and in this particular demo we will have to compile the program several
times and it would be very time consuming without without using an ID.
So with using Eclipse, the program will be auto compiled.
So it's very easy to do so.
It will basically save us some time.
Okay.
So a new method called switch example has been added to the basics demo class and you can also download
it from the resources section and it's just the same example.
So we are defining a variable called Month with three and here is the switch statement and here are
the three case labels, three case labels and we are just printing the month values and we have the
break statements and we also have a default.
BLOCK So let me just start on this program.
We have to just go here and click Run and it says Inside Switch example and it's printing March because
month is matching with the value with the case level value three.
Now let's look at one of the things we said was that switch expression type has to be only integer string
or enum.
So let's just make it double here.
So let's just put 2.0, which is a double value.
And as you can see, it shows this, it's underlined with with this red thing.
So it means that there is a compilation error and it says that cannot switch on a value of type double.
So it has to be either int integer or it has to be a string or an enum.
And we also said that we can use a box primitive as a speech expression.
So let's also try that.
So let's use integer class.
Let's call it month.
The value three.
And as you can see.
So the compiler error has also gone and if you run it, it still prints much.
So you can use a wrapper class like an integer.
And next, let me just delete this.
Let's look at the range restriction where the case label should be, should fall within the range of
the data type of the switch expression.
So let me just change it to byte here.
And so we have these three values.
So byte range is -128 to 127.
Now, let me just change this to 128.
Now it says it gives a compiler error and it says that cannot convert from INT to byte.
So and that's because this is an eight and it cannot be converted to byte.
We need an explicit cast.
And since the range is outside of byte, we are getting this error.
So one thing we can do is just do a cast here, and that's one solution.
So it needs to be within the range because if you do the cast, then you know the value gets Doncaster
to some value.
So we are numbered between between -128 to 127.
So without this it's outside the range and it gives the compiler error.
Okay, let's just head back to our slides.
So as we just saw.
Compiler must know the value of case label, otherwise it will never know whether or not the value is
within the range of the switch expressions data type.
Due to this, the second restriction says that case label value has to be a constant expression.
And let's look at it through this example.
The example is almost identical to the previous code.
Only addition is a variable month to here.
The value of the first case label, which is one is known at compile time itself.
So the compiler knows that the value is within the range of byte, which is the data type of the switch
expression.
But for the second case label, the variable month too is used.
However, such variables are evaluated only at runtime, and so their values are not known at compile
time.
So the compiler does not know if the value that month to host would be within the range of byte data
type or not.
So this causes a code to generate a compiler error.
So the solution is to use a constant expression.
And a constant expression would be either an integer literal or a string literal.
A string letter is simply text enclosed in double chords and we will look at strings in the next chapter.
Also a constant expression can be a constant variable, and a constant variable is just a variable like
month two, but it must be declared with a keyword called final and it must also have been initialized.
So in our example, since month two, it's already initialized.
If you just add the keyword final before the variable type byte, then it would become a constant variable
and final variables will be discussed later.
But it just means that the value of the variable once initialized can never be changed.
That is, value is constant.
Value is final since the value is constant.
Compiler knows whether or not the value is within the range of the switch expressions data type.
So if the value is outside the range, then it would give a compiler error.
Just note that a constant expression has a more broader definition.
But within the context of such statement, it just boils down to integer or string literals and constant
variable.
Let's now actually test this example in our code.
Okay.
Let's just go ahead and add the new variable month, too, which is also byte.
Initialize it to two and.
Change this label.
Two month to.
And we can see that there is a compiler error and it says case expressions must be constant expressions.
Right.
So so the case label has to be a constant expression and a constant expression, as we saw earlier,
can be either an integer literal or a string literal within the context of a switch.
Or it can be a constant variable.
And we said for that we need to.
Add this key word called final and it has to be initialized also.
If it's not initialized, then it's not a constant variable.
They also call it as a compile time constant.
So this is what it is.
So now you can see that we don't have the compilation error anymore.
So what is going to happen is at compile time, if it's a compile time, if it's a constant variable,
then the compiler would take this value too and would insert it here in the byte code.
And why is it doing so?
Because it's a compile time constant.
It's a final variable, which means that the value is not going to be changed once initialized.
So it's a final value.
So since it's not going to be changed, it can just take this value and plug it here so it's going to
hardwire it.
So that's the benefit of it.
But you might also say if it is like this, you might ask, why doesn't compiler do the same thing?
Because it knows that it's two.
Then why does it have to give a compiler error?
That's because the value is not final in this case, so the value can be changed.
Now let's just, for instance, assume that it's an instance variable.
So it's defined at the class level.
So the so the value could have been changed.
Let's say if it was an instance variable and it was initialized to two, that value could have been
changed anywhere in some other method also.
Right.
So and the compiler is not going to keep track of all of that.
So it's just way too complicated for it.
So so that's the reason it's not a final value and such kind of variables which are not final are evaluated
only at runtime.
So that's the thing.
So it needs to be a constant variable like this.
Now it's not going to change.
Now, let me just comment this out.
And let's not worry about this also.
Let's just say switch example.
I wrote a second method switch example of let's just pass two.
It's to it's right below this method.
Here it is.
So it's just the same code.
The code, the entire switch statement has been moved here.
And here the parameter is month to over here.
And even in this scenario you see everything else is same.
So month two is here, month two is here, month is defined here, month as defined here.
Even in this case, it's going to give a compiler error because it's a method parameter.
Here you see it's a final, but it's still a method parameter.
So it's got to be initialized.
It's got to be initialized to begin with.
So only then it can be considered as a constant variable.
Otherwise it's not a constant variable.
So this is not a constant variable.
So that's all there is.
And let's also look at the last two restrictions of case labels.
One is that it needs to be unique and the other as constant.
The case label cannot be null.
So let's also test that out.
Minimum this.
And let's change it back to let's make it one here.
So both of them are one.
And so we have a compiler error.
So it needs to be unique and this cannot be null also cannot be non excess, cannot convert from null
to byte.
So this is byte and this is null.
So those were the last two restrictions and that's about it.
So just go ahead and you can download this program and you can try it out to OC OC then.
Thank you.
And let's just go back to the slides.
Here is a useful tip.
It's a good practice to always use a break statement.
That is, you can have one even within the last block as it would avoid any errors if new case blocks
are introduced later.
Next question is when is it not feasible to use a switch statement?
Switch statement cannot be used when we have more than one condition to test.
Next is one condition to test is not equality.
That is we can use which only if we need to do equality tests.
This one is important.
It cannot be used when switch expression is something other than integer string or enum.
This was already discussed earlier.
Finally, a switch cannot be used if at least one of the case label restrictions does not apply.
So that's obvious.
So for all these cases, we cannot use a switch statement and have to go with an EF statement.
In the next lesson, we will see when a switch can be preferred over an EF statement.
So that's about it.
And we have taken a pretty in-depth look at the switch statement.
Thank you.